feat: first draft for TEE part 2 (#26)
ethereum/iptf-web: _drafts/private-crosschain-atomic-swap-part-2.md

---
layout: post
title: "Private Crosschain Atomic Swaps (Part 2 of 2)"

> description: "Inside the TEE coordinator: how a Trusted Execution Environment makes crosschain atomic swaps work today, what the real attack surfaces are, and why TEEs are a bridge to stronger cryptographic solutions."

Reviewer: Maybe rephrase so clear even w/o first article context

date: 2026-03-12 10:00:00 +0100

> author: "Yanis, Aaryamann"

Reviewer: Maybe keep one author for simplicity? And start article with acknowledge to other? Unless it was truly you wrote 50% each

image: /assets/images/2026-03-05-private-crosschain-swap-part-1/hero.png
tags:
  - atomic-swap
  - crosschain
  - tee
  - nitro-enclaves
  - proof-of-concept
---

In [Part 1](/private-crosschain-atomic-swap-part-1/), we built a protocol for private crosschain settlement. Shielded UTXO notes on two chains hide amounts and asset types. Stealth addresses let each party lock a note that only the counterparty can claim, without revealing who that counterparty is on-chain. A fallback timeout guarantees that if anything goes wrong, both parties reclaim their own funds.

> The remaining problem is coordination. Each party holds a secret (an ephemeral key and an encrypted salt) that the other needs to claim. Revealing these secrets must happen simultaneously: whoever goes first can be cheated, whoever goes second can defect. We left the coordinator as a black box. This post opens it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The remaining problem is coordination. Each party holds a secret (an ephemeral key and an encrypted salt) that the other needs to claim. Revealing these secrets must happen simultaneously, otherwise whoever goes first can be cheated, whoever goes second can defect. This post expands upon the role of a unbiased coordinator.
```

## What is a TEE?

> A Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) is a hardware-isolated area inside a processor where code runs without the host machine, its operating system, or the cloud provider being able to read the memory. Think of it as a locked glass room inside a data center: anyone can watch the room being built and verify the blueprints, but once the door closes, nobody outside can see or touch what happens inside. The program runs, produces outputs, and the room is torn down. The operator never gets a key.

Reviewer 2: TEE definition here not aligned with why we use Nitro, nitro is not hardware-isolated i believe

In our protocol, the TEE is the coordinator. It receives secrets from both swap parties, checks them against on-chain data, and publishes the claim keys. Because the enclave's memory is isolated, the operator running the machine cannot read the swap details passing through it.

> For this proof of concept, we use AWS Nitro Enclaves, a stripped-down virtual machine with no persistent storage, no network interface, and no interactive shell. The Nitro hypervisor walls it off from the host instance. Communication happens only through a narrow, pre-defined channel (a vsock).

Reviewer: link to intro enclaves, also sgx

> 

Reviewer: Maybe mention somewhere where TEEs are used in practice? Esp in Ethereum space

### How Nitro differs from SGX

> Intel SGX encrypts enclave memory at the chip level, so even the cloud provider operating the physical machine cannot read it. Nitro Enclaves rely on the hypervisor boundary instead: the isolation is logical, not cryptographic at the hardware level. The trade-off is straightforward. SGX protects against the cloud provider; Nitro trusts the cloud provider (AWS) but offers a simpler operational model with fewer side-channel attack surfaces. If you already trust your cloud provider with your infrastructure, Nitro is the simpler option. If you need protection _from_ the cloud provider, chip-level encryption (SGX, AMD SEV) is required.

Reviewer 2: i dont think SGX protects against the cloud provider, its still malleable hardware ~ as depicted in https://tee.fail

i think the right wording here should revolve around how self-hosting with the appropriate physical security measures is the ideal case to prevent hardware tampering

Author: Good catch!

### TEEs are not HSMs

> Institutions are used to Hardware Security Modules (HSMs) for key storage and signing. An HSM is a physically tamper-resistant vault (Common Criteria EAL5–7) with dedicated silicon and minimal firmware. It stores keys and never exports them. A TEE is logical isolation on a general-purpose processor (EAL2–4). It can run arbitrary code, but it lacks physical tamper resistance and has a larger attack surface. TEEs complement HSMs; they do not replace them. The question is not whether a TEE is "as secure" as an HSM — they solve different problems. The relevant question is: what happens when the TEE fails?

Reviewer 2: AWS supports exporting keys from the hsm - https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cloudhsm/latest/userguide/export-keys.html, some nuance required here

Author: Good catch!

> Institutions are used to Hardware Security Modules (HSMs) for key storage and signing. An HSM is a physically tamper-resistant vault (Common Criteria EAL5–7) with dedicated silicon and minimal firmware. It stores keys and never exports them. A TEE is logical isolation on a general-purpose processor (EAL2–4). It can run arbitrary code, but it lacks physical tamper resistance and has a larger attack surface. TEEs complement HSMs; they do not replace them. The question is not whether a TEE is "as secure" as an HSM — they solve different problems. The relevant question is: what happens when the TEE fails?

Reviewer: Explain Common Criteria EAL5-7 TLDR, maybe as footnote

### Where TEEs break

The failure modes matter:

- **Hardware manufacturer compromise.** The chip vendor could theoretically read everything inside the enclave. There is no cryptographic defense against this. Multi-vendor deployments reduce single-vendor risk but do not eliminate it.

> - **Firmware or side-channel bugs.** Spectre, Foreshadow, and similar attacks have historically let an attacker on the same machine extract enclave memory. The class of vulnerability is not eliminated by any TEE architecture.

Reviewer 2: links to the attacks would be nice to include for those interested in understanding the threat model better

> - **I/O manipulation.** The host operator controls every byte going into and out of the enclave. They can feed false data, withhold outputs, or selectively censor. The enclave's memory is protected, but its communication channel is not.

Reviewer 2: not sure about the communication channel being open to censorship. if the code is open source, _and_ the tls channel is set up correctly, then the host just sees encrypted data. the host _could_ prevent access from certain ip addresses, but not exactly alter bytes in a way that counts as false data

Author: Right, this is a simpler mitigation than ZKPs inside the TEE.

- **No post-hoc verification of privacy.** You can use a ZK proof to verify that a function was executed correctly (the math holds regardless of who ran it). But you cannot verify that a malicious operator did not observe your inputs during execution. Attestation proves the right code is running. It does not prove nobody watched.

### TEEs are not a substitute for cryptography

A ZK proof is a mathematical guarantee: it holds even if every participant is adversarial. A TEE's confidentiality depends on the hardware vendor not being compromised and the firmware not having exploitable bugs. There is no way to verify either of those after the fact.

> The scenario we are exploring is institution-to-institution bilateral settlement. Both parties know each other, have contractual recourse, and can audit the enclave code and attestation. In this setting, TEEs are a practical trust-minimization tool. Designing for an end-user-to-institution setting would require a different threat model with stronger guarantees (and likely pure-crypto primitives). TEEs are what works today. When MPC matures enough for interactive coordination, the coordinator can be swapped out.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The scenario we are exploring is institution-to-institution bilateral settlement. Both parties know each other, have contractual recourse, and can audit the enclave code and attestation. In this setting, TEEs are a practical trust-minimization tool. Designing for an end-user-to-institution setting would require a different threat model with stronger guarantees (and likely pure-crypto primitives). When MPC matures enough for interactive coordination, the coordinator can be swapped out. For now, TEEs fill the gap (albeit with a lighter security model).
```

or equivalent

## How clients verify the enclave

Before submitting anything to the coordinator, each party needs assurance that the code running inside the enclave is exactly the open-source coordinator, unmodified and unobserved by the operator. This is the job of remote attestation.

![Remote attestation flow](/assets/images/2026-03-12-private-crosschain-swap-part-2/diagram-1-attestation-flow.png)

The build process is deterministic. The coordinator binary, its configuration, and its dependencies are packaged into an image. A build tool hashes everything in that image into a set of measurements (fingerprints of the code, configuration, and boot chain). These measurements are public: anyone can rebuild the image from source and verify they get the same hash.

> When the enclave boots, it generates a fresh encryption key pair and asks the hardware security module on the host card to sign a certificate binding that key to the enclave's measurements. The hardware module's signature chains to the cloud provider's root certificate, which is publicly verifiable.

Reviewer 2: the encryption keypair is fresh on each boot? is HSM tightly coupled with the TEE?

## Inside the coordinator

The coordinator's job is narrow: receive submissions from both parties, verify that their locked notes match the agreed swap terms, and publish the claim secrets atomically.

![TEE coordinator architecture](/assets/images/2026-03-12-private-crosschain-swap-part-2/diagram-2-tee-coordinator.png)

### What the coordinator receives

Each party submits a swap identifier, a nonce, their ephemeral public key, an encrypted salt, and the plaintext details of the note they locked. The coordinator never receives any spending key. It gets public keys and note metadata, nothing that could be used to move funds.

### Hash-only verification

The core design choice: the TEE performs no cryptographic operations beyond hashing. All the expensive math (stealth address derivation, shared secret computation, salt encryption) was already proven correct inside the ZK circuit and verified on-chain when each party locked their note.

The ZK circuit outputs four binding commitments as public inputs alongside the note commitment:

```

> h_swap = Hash("tee_swap_v0", swap_id, salt)

Reviewer 2: why do we include "tee_swap_v0" here?

The demo walks through four phases. First, Alice and Bob each receive a funded note on their respective chain (standard shielded UTXO commitments with no link to the recipient's identity). Second, both parties agree on swap terms off-chain, derive a deterministic swap ID, and lock their notes to stealth addresses. At this point, each party generates a ZK proof (around 9 KB) that the lock is correctly formed. Third, both parties submit their secrets to the coordinator over the attested encrypted channel. The coordinator verifies the binding commitments against on-chain data and, once both sides check out, posts the announcement transaction. Fourth, both parties read the announcement, derive their claim keys, and submit claim proofs. Alice ends up with bond notes on Scroll; Bob ends up with USD notes on Sepolia.

The full demo output (with links to every on-chain transaction on Sepolia and Scroll explorers) is available as a [gist](https://gist.github.com/Meyanis95/93c01b2d486489633655949997384483).

## Limitations

### Hardware trust

> The hardware trust assumption has no cryptographic fallback. If the hardware vendor is compromised, or has been compelled, they can read everything inside the enclave. Side-channel attacks have a long history (Foreshadow, Plundervolt, SGAxe); hypervisor-isolated enclaves have a simpler boundary, but the class of vulnerability is not eliminated. A single TEE instance is also a single point of failure for liveness: if the enclave goes down, swaps stall until the timeout expires.

Reviewer 2: links here would be nice

### Protocol gaps

The shielded pool contracts must be deployed on every network where assets are traded. Each deployment starts with an empty Merkle tree and zero anonymity set. Growing that set takes time and volume.

Rollup finality is limited. Confirmation times affect the lock and claim windows, and a locked note must survive potential reorgs on both chains before it is safe to coordinate.

> The UTXO model requires custom wallet infrastructure: scanning for notes, decrypting memos, tracking nullifiers, managing Merkle proofs. None of this has standardized tooling today. The account model has decades of wallet support and established tooling. The UTXO model trades that for privacy, and the tooling cost is real.

Reviewer 2: is it decades? :)

Author: Good catch! 
I changed for 'years' instead.
